---
title: "Foreword and Syllabus"
filename: "lec_00_0_foreword"
chapternum: "p"
---



# Foreword and Syllabus


>   *"Human ingenuity cannot concoct a cipher which human ingenuity cannot
>   resolve."* Edgar Allan Poe, 1841

Cryptography - the art or science of "secret writing" - has been around for
several millenia. For almost all that time, Edgar Allan Poe's quote above
held true. Indeed, the history of cryptography is littered with the figurative
corpses of cryptosystems believed secure and then broken, and sometimes with the
actual corpses of those who have mistakenly placed their faith in these
cryptosystems. Yet, something changed in the last few decades. New cryptosystems
have been found that have not been broken despite being subjected to immense
efforts involving both human ingenuity and computational power on a scale that
completely dwarves the "crypto breakers" of Poe's time. Even more amazingly,
these cryptosystems are not only seemingly unbreakable, but they also achieve
this under much harsher conditions. Not only do today's attackers have more
computational power but they also have more data to work with. In Poe's age, an
attacker would be lucky if they got access to more than a few ciphertexts with
known plaintexts. These days attackers might have massive amounts of data -
terabytes or more - at their disposal. In fact, with *public key* encryption,
an attacker can generate as many ciphertexts as they wish.

These new types of cryptosystems, both more secure and more versatile, have
enabled many applications that in the past were not only impossible but in fact
*unimaginable*. These include secure communication without sharing a secret,
electronic voting without a trusted authority, anonymous digital cash, and many
more. Cryptography now supplies crucial infrastructure without which much of the
modern "communication economy" could not function.

This course is about the story of this cryptographic revolution. However, beyond
the cool applications and the crucial importance of cryptography to our society,
it contains also intellectual and mathematical beauty. To understand these often
paradoxical notions of cryptography, you need to think differently, adapting the
point of view of an attacker, and (as we will see) sometimes adapting the points
of view of other hypothetical entities. More than anything, this course is about
this cryptographic way of thinking. It may not be immediately applicable to
protecting your credit card information or to building a secure system, but
learning a new way of thinking is its own reward.

Â 

## Syllabus

In this fast-paced course, I plan to start from the very basic notions of
cryptography and by the end of the term reach some of the exciting advances that
happened in the last few years such as the construction of *fully homomorphic
encryption*, a notion that Brian Hayes called "one of the most amazing magic
tricks in all of computer science", and *indistinguishability obfuscators* which
are even more amazing. To achieve this, our focus will be on *ideas* rather than
*implementations* and so we will present cryptographic notions in their
pedagogically simplest form -- the one that best illustrates the underlying
concepts -- rather than the one that is most efficient, widely deployed, or
conforms to Internet standards. We will discuss some examples of practical
systems and attacks, but only when these serve to illustrate a conceptual point.

Depending on time, I plan to cover the following notions:

-   Part I: Introduction

    1.  **How do we define security for encryption?** Arguably the most
        important step in breaking out of the "build-break-tweak" cycle that
        Poe's quote described has been the idea that we can have a
        *mathematically precise* definition of security, rather than relying on
        fuzzy notions, that allow us only to determine with certainty that a
        system is *broken* but never have a chance of *proving* that a system is
        *secure* .

    2.  **Perfect security and its limitations:** Showing the possibility (and
        the limitations) of encryptions that are perfectly secure regardless of the
        attacker's computational resources.

    3.  **Computational security:** Bypassing the above limitations by
        restricting to computationally efficient attackers. Proofs of security
        by reductions.

-   Part II: Private Key Cryptography

    1.  **Pseudorandom generators:** The basic building block of cryptography,
        which also provided a new twist on the age-old philosophical and
        scientific question of the nature of randomness.

    2.  **Pseudorandom functions, permutations, block ciphers:** Block ciphers
        are the working horse of crypto.

    3.  **Authentication and active attacks:** *Authentication* turns out to be
        as crucial, if not more so, to security than *secrecy* and often a
        precondition to the latter. We'll talk about notions such as Message
        Authentication Codes and Chosen-Ciphertext-Attack secure encryption, as
        well as real-world examples why these notions are necessary.

    4.  **Hash functions and the "Random Oracle Model":** Hash functions are
        used everwhere in crypto, including for verifying integrity, entropy
        distillation, and many other cases.

    5.  **Building pseudorandom generators from one-way permutations (optional):**
        Justifying our "axiom" of pseudo-random generators by deriving it from a
        weaker assumption.

-   Part III: Public key encryption

    1.  **Public key cryptography and the obfuscation paradigm:** How did
        Diffie, Hellman, Merkle, Ellis even dare to *imagine* the possibility of
        public key encryption?

    2.  **Constructing public key encryption: Factoring, discrete log, and
        lattice based systems:** We'll discuss several variants for constructing
        public key systems, including those that are widely deployed such as
        RSA, Diffie-Hellman, and the elliptic curve variants. We'll also discuss some
        variants of *lattice based cryptosystems* that have the advantage of not
        being broken by quantum computers and being more versatile. The
        former's weakness to quantum computers is the reason why the NSA has advised
        people to transition to lattice-based cryptosystems in the not too far future.

    3.  **Signature schemes:** These are the public key versions of
        authentication, though interestingly they are easier to construct in some
        sense than the latter.

    4.  **Active attacks for encryption:** Chosen ciphertext attacks for public
        key encryption.

-   Part IV: Advanced notions

    1.  **Fully homomorphic encryption:** Computing on encrypted data.

    2.  **Multiparty secure computation:** An amazing construction that enables
        applications such as playing poker over the net without trusting the
        server, privacy preserving data mining, electronic auctions without a
        trusted auctioneer, and electronic elections without a trusted central
        authority.

    3.  **Zero knowledge proofs:** Prove a statement without revealing the
        reason to *why* its true.

    4.  **Quantum computing and cryptography:** Shor's algorithm to break RSA
        and friends. Quantum key distribution. On "quantum resistant" cryptography.

    5.  **Indistinguishability obfuscation:** Construction of
        indistinguishability obfuscators, the potential "master tool" for
        crypto.

    6.  **Practical protocols:** Techniques for constructing practical protocols
        for particular tasks as opposed to general (and often inefficient)
        feasibility proofs.

    7. **Cryptocurrencies:** Hash chains and Merkle trees, proofs of work, achieving
    consensus on a ledger via "majority of cycles", smart contracts, achieving anonymity
    via zero knowledge proofs.

### Prerequisites

The main prerequisite is the ability to read, write (and even enjoy!)
mathematical proofs. In addition, familiarity with algorithms, basic probability
theory and basic linear algebra will be helpful. We'll only use fairly basic
concepts from all these areas: e.g. Oh-notation- e.g. $O(n)$ running time - from
algorithms, notions such as events, random variables, expectation, from
probability theory, and notions such as matrices, vectors, and eigenvectors.
Mathematically mature students should be able to pick up the needed notions on
their own. See the "mathematical background" handout for more details.

No programming knowledge is needed. If you're interested in the course but are
not sure if you have sufficient background, or you have any other questions,
please don't hesitate to contact me.

Why is cryptography hard?
-------------------------

Cryptography is a hard topic. Over the course of history, many brilliant people
have stumbled in it, and did not realize subtle attacks on their ciphers. Even
today it is frustratingly easy to get crypto wrong, and often system security is
compromised because developers used crypto schemes in the wrong, or at least
suboptimal, way. Why is this topic (and this course) so hard? Some of the
reasons include:

-   To argue about the security of a cryptographic scheme, you have to think
    like an attacker. This requires a very different way of thinking than what
    we are used to when developing algorithms or systems, and arguing that they
    perform well.

-   To get robust assurances of security you need to argue about *all possible
    attacks* . The only way I know to analyze this infinite set is via
    *mathematical proofs* . Moreover, these types of mathematical proofs tend to
    be rather different than the ones most mathematicians typically work with.
    Because the proof itself needs to take the viewpoint of the attacker, these
    often tend to be proofs by contradiction and involve several twists of logic
    that take some getting used to.

-   As we'll see in this course, even *defining* security is a highly non-trivial
    task. Security definitions often get subtle and require quite a lot
    of creativity. For example, the way we model in general a statement such as
    "An attacker Eve does not get more information from observing a system above
    what she knew a-priori" is that we posit a "hypothetical alter ego" of Eve
    called Lilith who knows everything Eve knew a-priori but does not get to
    observe the actual interaction in the system. We then want to prove that
    anything that Eve learned could also have been learned by Lilith. If this
    sounds confusing, it is. But it is also fascinating, and leads to ways to
    argue mathematically about *knowledge* as well as beautiful generalizations
    of the notion of encryption and protecting communication into schemes for
    protecting *computation* .

If cryptography is so hard, is it really worth studying? After all, given this
subtlety, a single course in cryptography is no guarantee of using (let alone
inventing) crypto correctly. In my view, regardless of its immense and growing
practical importance, cryptography is worth studying for its *intellectual*
content. There are many areas of science where we achieve goals once considered
to be science fiction. But cryptography is an area where current achievements
are so fantastic that in the thousands of years of secret writing people did not
even dare *imagine* them. Moreover, cryptography may be hard because it forces
you to think differently, but it is also rewarding because it *teaches* you to
think differently. And once you pass this initial hurdle, and develop a
"cryptographer's mind", you might find that this point of view is useful in
areas that seem to have nothing to do with crypto.
